Most agent demos forget everything, like you tell the agent that your preference, your role, your project context, or what you're trying to build, and in the next session, it behaves like it never met you. Now, that is why memory matters for agent. But, memory in agent is not just about sending the whole chat history again. There is shorter memory where the agent tracks what is happening in the current conversation. There's also something called as a long-term memory where the agent stores the useful information across the session and brings it back when it becomes relevant. So, in this video, we'll be using the LangMem to build the simple memory-enabled agent and understand the intuition behind how the agent memory works. So, the core idea we need to understand from this video is this, like what is it the agent should remember? How do How does it store that memory? How does it recall it later? And what can go wrong if you add the memory blindly? So, let's get started, guys. So, we've already created the code. The same repository link is provided in the description. So, this is how the project folder would look like. So, you can see in readme.md file which has got the clear instructions. There's a requirements.txt which describes about the libraries and everything. We can simply get started. First and foremost, uh let's set up our virtual environment. See the Here in our learning journey, we are using this LangMem, LangGraph, LangChain, OpenAI, and python.env. So, LangMem is the one that will give us the memory extraction workflow. LangGraph is the one that will give us the in-memory store for this demo, and I'll be using this LangChain OpenAI for working with working with with my OpenAI model. And .env that would help me to load the environment variables from this .env file. So, to get started, I would go ahead and create my virtual environment. I would say {hyphen} m v n v .v n v. So, this will go ahead and create a new virtual environment for me. Then, I'm going to activate it. This I'll say star source .v n v / bin / activate. Okay, this will activate my virtual environment. I would say pip install {hyphen} r requirements.txt. So, this will go ahead and install the necessary libraries in this virtual environment. So, this is what I have done. If you are working on Windows, so you just need to run the command of .env / scripts / activate. Instead of bin, it should be / scripts. That's all. It's updated in the readme.md file. Now, one more thing that you need to do over here is before you run the demo, ensure that you create this .env file by copying this .env.example and ensure that you mention your OpenAI API key. So, these are the prerequisite for you to work with the same. So, now, let's take a look into this code that we have got. I'm going to open this file that is demo.py file and let's understand what is happening over here. So, first things first, I went ahead and performed necessary standard imports. Now, here I'm also importing this from .env load .env. This would help me to read the environment variables that is OpenAI API key. And here, I've also went ahead and imported the human message and the system message so that we can work with the messages that would help us to work with the same. So, these are the message object for our LLM call. And chat OpenAI, this is basically for my chat AI that my open AI chat model wrapper I'm using this in-memory store. So, this is the LangGraph's local memory store. So, this keeps us This actually keeps the memory in RAM while the script runs. And create memory manager. This is the Lang mem function that will extract the useful memories from the conversation text. And I'm also importing this base model and field from Pydantic. We use them to define the structured memory schema. To begin with, I'm defining my user ID and my memory namespace name. So, I'm just defining my fake user as uh YouTube demo user and the entity name as learning coach memories for the specific user ID. See, this matters because the long-term memory should be scoped per user, per organization. Because in the real-world application, you don't want every user writing into the same memory bucket. We generally scope them by user, tenant, team, workspace, or project ID. And here, since my memory works in RAM, so I went ahead and prepared this first set of messages that mentions as, "I am a back-end engineer learning Agent AKI. I prefer practical examples. I'm preparing for AI interviews." And there's a second follow-up message which says as, "How should I study this week?" See, if you look into the second message, there's no mention about the user about, "Okay, he or she is a back-end engineer." Whether he or she prefers the practical example and what exactly that they are preparing for. But, what we are expecting is when we are sending the second message, we would expect that it still be able to remember the context. So, that is the overall idea right here. Okay? So, the personalization, whatever it will come, it has to come from my stored memory. Here, we have created a class that's called as learning coach memory. So, this is what basically what we call it as a shape of a memory. So, this inherits my PyDantic base model. So, basically, it's a memory that we are defining, which is a long-term memory for this AI learning coach application. To begin with, I've defined something called as memory type. And this is the first field that we have defined, and I have defined it as literal. That means I'm saying that the memory type can be one of four values. Role, learning goal, preference, and current focus. It should be one of these value. So, that means when the when it is running like the LLM cannot randomly invent the random categories. It has to be one of these categories. Hence, I've mentioned as literal. Then, we also have a field description. So, this basically this field description, this will basically help us about what exactly is this about. Like here, it is the kind of information being remembered. Then, I have value. Okay? This is the concise exact value that I want to remember, which is my actual memory value. Like back end engineer, agent AI, practical examples, AI interviews. So, those are the key thing. Reason. So, here, this makes the memory more inspectable. Like instead of storing the value, we are also going to store as why that value is useful for future coaching. This important because memory should be reviewable. You want to understand why the system has decided to store something. Okay? So, that's what we have created and we have just created a helper function that will help us to print some nice things for us in a nice manner. And this would enable us to validate whether my OpenAI API key present. So, to get started over here, I've created one more function that's called a setup memory store. Now, this would basically initialize my in-memory store. Okay? This is going to return an in-memory store for me. So, this store basically represents my long-term memory in this given demo. Okay? This is the core idea right here. Like, and I want you to remember this even though I'm talking about as a long-term memory, it will still get clear when I actually when the script gets executed. Okay? So, just for demonstration purpose, I'm using this in-memory store. While working, you can also use the durable storage as well. For now, this is enough for our learning. Then, this will actually initialize my LLM and this is going to return my LLM object that is my chat OpenAI instance for me. And there's also one more function that's called as extract and store memory function. Now, this is going to receive the user message, the LLM, and my in-memory store. And this is going to return the learning coach memory objects. So, this function is where my short-term conversation context gets converted into my long-term memory. Okay? That's what is happening over here. See, here I'm creating it as a memory manager and I'm defining my LLM, the schema, and the instruction. So, these are what I have mentioned right here. So, what it means is this is going to create a memory that is my LangMem memory manager. We'll pass our LLM as our first argument, and we are passing our schema, which tells the LangMem to extract the memories using the schema, not extract randomly. It has to use the schema that we have defined above. Okay. Now, once it extracted or during this extraction, we've also mentioned about the instruction. This will tell the memory manager as what it what we actually want it to remember. We are saying it as extract only durable learning coach memories about the user. Focus on role, focus on learning goal, preference, and current focus. Create one memory for each type when the user provides that information. Do not store sensitive data. And very important right here. I've also mentioned about the configuration. I've mentioned as enable inserts as true. That means manager can create new memories. Enable updates as false. That means this simple demo that we have created, we will not update the existing memories. Enable delete as false. That means here, we will not delete the memories either. Now, in production, this update and delete behavior matter a lot. But for this scenario, we'll keep this operation simple because I want you to build that core understanding now. Then you can work around with the same code that I'll be sharing, and you can experiment it. Then, I'm calling it as manager.invoke. We are saying it as message, and we are mentioning our user message. Now, this is the text that my LangMem is going to inspect. And I've also mentioned as maximum steps as one. That means the extraction flow would be simple. We ask it to pass like we ask it to create one pass of the memory extraction. That's what we have created. Okay, that's the core idea and then we went ahead and created the empty list called memory. So that's this what is being created right here. Now this list will hold the structured memories that we actually store and print. So that's what we have created right here. Okay, we are appending it before this memory for whatever content that we have got. We are just going to be appending it. So we are just looping through these extracted Lang memory result. So each result will have some kind of a content attribute. I'm going to extract that value. We will check that whether it is actually my learning coach memory. If not, I'm going to skip it. Okay, this is something that I would be doing it. And if the content is valid, I'm appending it back into my memories Python list that I have. Then we will go ahead and store this memory. I'm saying it as stored output on my memory name space. Like this decides where the memory goes. And I'm also mentioning my key that is memory.id which is the ID returned by my LangChain. Okay, that's what is being happening right here. And the value over here, that is content is basically a dictionary with a memory content. That's what we are returning right here. Because this content.model_dump is going to convert my Pydantic object into a normal Python dictionary that can that we can actually save it. Okay, that's the that is what is happening and then we are returning this memory output. Then we have one more function that is called as search or recall function. Now this is going to receive the store and the later user message that we have. And this is going to return the list of recalled learning coach memory object. Okay? So, that's what is happening right here. So, in this example, I'm just going ahead and like we'll recall everything from the user's memory name space. In the production scenario, you would often use maybe semantic search or pass the user message as a search query. Okay? That's what you would be doing in the production scenario. So, in this scenario we we just going to be looking into the complete memory. So, we here what we are doing right now over here is we are searching the memory space that is my memory so that we have got inside the same name space that we had used for saving. And I'm mentioning query as none, that means we are not doing any semantic filtering here. Limit as 10 means this is going to return the 10 stored memories for me. Maximum 10 stored memories for me. That's what it's going to do. Then, here we're going to convert the each stored records back into my Pydantic memory object. See, I'm converting it into my Pydantic memory object. That's what we are doing. We pull out the content object from each of the memory and then we just going to be going ahead and validate with the help of my Pydantic. And finally, we return those recalled memories. The next function that is created is just for displaying purpose. It takes list of memories and returns it as a string. Okay? That's what we are doing. And then, this is a function that we have created to generate what we call it as the personalized response. Like, this is going to receive the latest user message, the recalled memories, and the LLM. It is going to return the string response for me. Okay? That's what it's going to be. Like it will basically have the information about the previous memory and that is my recalled memories that I have got along with my second prompt and my LLM so that it can look into my memory, look into my current question and generate the response. That's the core idea about what is happening over here inside this generate personalized response. It's a very simple thing. Okay, then that's the core idea right here. Now once this is done, I want you to just focus on this main. So this will go ahead and load my open AI API key, set up my memory store, set up my LLM. First sending my initial user messages. We'll extract and store the memory. Then we would go ahead and recall the memory using my from my memory store that I've got and I will go ahead and send the recalled memory second message as well as my LLM. This will generate the final answer for me. So that's a very simple thing that we have created. Now that we have understood what is present in this code, let's go ahead and execute the same. Okay, so here I would go ahead and mention it like this. I'll say Python demo.py. So I'm using the in-memory store so we don't have to worry about the other things. See conversation one, I'm back end engineer, I prefer practical examples and everything. So memory has been stored. Role is back end engineer, learning goal is using the KI, preferences practical example, current focus is preparing for AI interviews. These are the key things that has been stored. Now in the second conversation, the user returns later. The user says, "How should I study this week?" Memory has been recalled. This is what we have recalled it and the agent is going to response using the memory. This is the 7-day, one-week study plan that is tailored for the back-end engineer with a focus on practical application for agent care interviews and this is how it would look like. So clearly it is able to look into my previous memory that means information about the user and this information was extracted using the LLM using the LangMem library and we are able to fetch the same and be able to use it. So that's the core idea about working with the memory guys. So this is the core mental model about working with the memory in agent care system. Now let's connect this to short-term versus long-term memory. See short-term is what is present in my current prompt or in my current thread. Long-term is the memory where the information has been extracted out of the conversation and saved somewhere else. Now here save somewhere else is nothing but my in-memory store. In production that would usually be persistent back store like which could be post grace database where you will have a retrieval, you'll have a audit log, you'll have a user controls over there. Okay, those are the key things that you need to be worrying about and few things that I would recommend you to further check out as also check about the memory governance. How do you handle the stale memory? Edit and delete memory, privacy building. These are the key things that I would add it including the observability to make it even more production ready. All right guys, so that is a simple intuition behind memory in agents. The agent is not just about responding to the current prompt now. It can extract the useful information, store it and bring it to later when it becomes relevant. And this also where the engineering judgment matters because once your agent has memory, you need to ask the harder question. Should this information be remembered? Is it temporary conversation state or is it my long-term memory? Can the user inspect it or correct it? So, these are the additional production things that you need to add it over here. And this exactly what we teach inside our AI code review playbook, which is about how to review the AI rag and agent decay code base for architecture risk, reliability gaps, unsafe tools, memory behavior, evaluating us. If your gap is building the production style agent decay system, then you can also check out our boot camp as well. The code is linked in the description. Check out our GitHub links and also check out the links of the courses if that resonates with you. So, subscribe to our channel if you're here for the first time. Join our community where we share these interview references interview reference questions every week so that you can stay updated. So, with this we come to the end of this video. So, remember system ship demo stoned. This is Nachiketa Murthy. I'll see you next time.